---
layout: post
title: Generalizing Geocentric orbit visualizations
---

Lately, I've been watching [Orb: On the Movements of the
Earth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orb:_On_the_Movements_of_the_Earth), an
anime about astronomers researching heliocentric theories while evading
religious persecution. I wanted to explore how geocentric orbits looked, and
also view what maps of space might have looked like from other planets.

---

<style>
.myimg {
    max-width: 50%;
    background: white;
}
@media (orientation: portrait) {
  .myimg {
    max-width: 85%;
    background: white;
  }
}
.myimgctr { text-align: center; }
</style>
<script src="https://aneeshdurg.me/art/output/orb/orb.js" type="text/javascript"></script>

I've really been enjoying `Orb` so far, but I felt like a missed opportunity was
that the show lacked visualizations that reveal how changing the reference
object from which motion is calculated shows different patterns for the same
movements. I really wanted to see how the complex looping curves followed by
planets in the geocentric model map to the clean concentric orbits of the
heliocentric model. So I decided to make my own!

Here's what celestial orbits look like from a geocentric perspective:

<div class="myimgctr">
    <canvas class="myimg" id="canvas0"></canvas>
    <br>
    <button id="toggle0">View Heliocentric</button>
</div>
<script>
document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", () => {
    const canvas0 = document.getElementById("canvas0");
    const orb0 = new Orb(canvas0);
    orb0.reference_id = 3;
    function f(t) {
      orb0.draw(t);
      requestAnimationFrame(f);
    }
    requestAnimationFrame(f);
    window.orb0 = orb0;

    const toggle0 = document.getElementById("toggle0");
    toggle0.addEventListener("click", () => {
        if (orb0.reference_id == 0) {
            toggle0.innerText = "View Heliocentric";
            orb0.set_reference(3);
        } else {
            toggle0.innerText = "View Geocentric";
            orb0.set_reference(0);
        }
    });
});
</script>

Chaotic right? Bring order to the cosmos using the button above to toggle a
heliocentric view instead!

Pretty cool! One caveat is that the visualization above chooses parameters for
the rate of orbit and the radius of each orbit to make things look pretty. None
of this is accurate, but accurate doesn't look as nice for a quick demo. When
you press the button above, the visualization changes the object that it's
treating as the origin for the coordinate system so all motion is relative to
whatever the new origin is! This is cool, but I thought it might also be cool to
see what the motion looks like when choosing planets other than Earth as the
reference. Use the drop down below to see them all! I really like `Mercury` and
`Neptune` because they highlight interesting phenomena - from the perspective of
`Mercury`, every planet is doing a beautiful swirling dance, and from `Neptune`
it looks like every planet orbits the sun, and that the sun orbits `Neptune`.

<div class="myimgctr">
    <canvas class="myimg" id="canvas1"></canvas>
    <br>
    <label for="reference">Choose a reference object:</label>
    <select name="reference" id="reference">
        <option value="0">Sun</option>
        <option value="1">Mercury</option>
        <option value="2">Venus</option>
        <option value="3">Earth</option>
        <option value="4">Mars</option>
        <option value="5">Jupiter</option>
        <option value="6">Saturn</option>
        <option value="7">Uranus</option>
        <option value="8">Neptune</option>
    </select>
</div>
<script>
document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", () => {
    const canvas1 = document.getElementById("canvas1");
    const orb1 = new Orb(canvas1);
    orb1.reference_id = 8;
    function f(t) {
      orb1.draw(t);
      requestAnimationFrame(f);
    }
    requestAnimationFrame(f);
    window.orb1 = orb1;

    const ref = document.getElementById("reference");
    ref.value = 8;
    ref.addEventListener("change", () => {
        orb1.set_reference(Number.parseInt(ref.value));
    });
});
</script>

I think there's some things that could be improved about this visualization:

+ It could use a better color palette
+ The "tails" of each orbit could react better when the reference is changed
+ Tweaking the rate of orbit a bit more could find more visually interesting
  patterns

But overall, I think this is a pretty cool toy to play with!
