---
layout: post
title: My first contribution to cPython!
series: chkpt
---

Getting `cProfile` to handle scripts that import `__main__`.

---

Previously, I've written about the challenges of handling `__main__` while tracing/monitoring
execution of scripts, and that `cProfile` (the built-in python profiling tool) doesn't handle this
well. Long story short, I was able to [contribute a
fix](https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/132738) that makes this possible! The `cpython`
maintainers were super responsive and very helpful, which made it feel super approachable. This is
probably the largest project I've ever contributed to, and it's surreal to think that a small bit of
code I wrote will eventually be distributed to so many machines around the world.

The fix for `cProfile` is quite similar to what I do in `chkpt`, but the difference is that instead
of executing the code directly through the module loader, I instead pass a reference to a newly
created module named `__main__`'s `__dict__` as the `globals` to `exec`.

Something that was pretty funny to me was that `pdb` implements this correctly. Had I tried `pdb`
instead of `cProfile`, I would have never found this bug, and also probably figured out how to
implement something similar for `chkpt`, but I would have never gained a deeper understanding. I
think the current implementation for `chkpt` (and now `cProfile`), where a new module is created and
then set to be `__main__` for the user supplied code is much cleaner and less hacky than the `pdb`
implementation. I wonder if there's a better, more reusable way to express this pattern in a way
that can easily be used by other monitoring/profiling tools.

Working on this has given me a lot more understanding and comfort in understanding how modules are
implemented in python. It's made me rethink my [previous
hacks](https://github.com/aneeshdurg/multiversionpython) I've done to get multiple versions of the
same module to be importable within the same project. I think it's possible to do this in a cleaner
way by constructing the module objects directly, and giving each module a different view of
`sys.path`. Anyway, this contribution a fun little spin-off from my ongoing effort in building
`chkpt`. Glad to have contributed back to the community!
