---
layout: post
title: Paper Review 05 - Junkyard Computing
permalink: /posts/2024/02/28-thoughts-on-junkyard-computing/
---

My thoughts on [Junkyard Computing: Repurposing Discarded Smartphones to Minimize Carbon](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3575693.3575710)

---

Today's paper has received a Distinguished Paper award from ASPLOS '23. It aims
to understand the carbon impacts of reusing discarded consumer computing devices
as servers in datacenters.

## Do you have old smartphones at home? Maybe old laptops?

Many of us likely have e-waste that we haven't quite gotten around to disposing
of yet. In my apartment I currently have 3 old smartphones, 2 old laptops, and 2
unused raspberry pis. While I am mildly ashamed of my e-excess, I like to tell
myself that someday I'll find uses for these things. Most of my daydreams
involve repurposing these discarded devices in someway - I'd like to self-host
this website on an rpi eventually, I'd like to put a media server on one of the
laptops, I'd like to dabble in smarthome/automation solutions with some of the
other devices, one of the phones could permanently live next to our bluetooth
speaker as a media controller, etc. There's a lot of latent computing power in
these devices, and as all of them are less than a decade old, they would
generally perform acceptably for most tasks today. This is just the devices in
my apartment though. Consider all such phones/laptops across the world - how
much latent computing power do we have that's destined for landfills?

This paper proposes using discarded consumer devices instead of traditional
servers in datacenters. It goes on to define a way of representing the carbon
emissions, and compares the repurposed cluster against a similarly powerful
server. Finally, it also compares how the repurposed cluster fares against a
traditional server using `memcached` to benchmark.

## Aren't newer devices more efficient?

The paper highlights a key observation that while newer computing devices may
have better power efficiency, manufacturing those new devices specifically for
use in datacenters poses a unique carbon cost that repurposing existing devices
is immune from (the claim is that the carbon cost of usage is better amortized
over the lifespan of the device). The paper then goes on to show that while
modern smartphone/laptop compute capability is impressive, it doesn't quite
match up to mid-range server-class hardware, and clustering multiple devices
together is required. While this means that some applications will not run as
well, many common tasks do perform reasonably well, and some smartphones/laptops
are similarly spec'ed compared to some low-tier AWS instances.

The paper also sketches out a way to efficiently charge the devices in a
carbon-friendly way by only charging when the California energy grid is being
supplied with solar energy. This charging is also enabled/disabled depending on
the state of the battery which likely helps with battery longevity (though no
such study is done as part of this work). The built-in presence of batteries
makes this much simpler to implement than with traditional servers, which may
require special infrastructure to implement similar techniques.

The paper also benchmarks the cluster in a number of ways, including running
`memcached`, which shows that this architecture is promising, and could host
real-world applications.

## My Thoughts

- This would be super cool to power the indie web

There's so many interesting "indie web" projects out there from [LOW TECH
MAGAZINE](https://solar.lowtechmagazine.com/), [nekoweb](https://nekoweb.org/),
and even protocols like Gemini. The common thread between all these projects is
that they don't require very powerful resources - it's a small amount of data
that serves a low-number of requests, with maybe some occasional spikes of
traffic, but still nothing near the high-volume traffic that "popular" website
incur. The kind of server architecture in this paper would definitely be
sufficient to power these communities, and it makes me think about getting some
friends together and making a free hosting platform for personal websites built
with repurposed devices.

- It would be interesting to see what the numbers would look like if the carbon
  impacts of manufacturing the smartphones was included.

In some ways, an aftermarket for smartphones still contributes to/enables the
demand for new manufacturing of smartphones. That doesn't mean that finding ways
of reusing existing devices isn't important or useful, but it does mean that
compared to solutions that find ways of prevent consumers from buying new
devices (or repairing devices they already own instead of buying new) would
eliminate the carbon emissions of manufacturing as well.

- Battery concerns

Batteries can fail catastrophically, which jeopardizes all co-located compute
nodes. While the smart-charging algorithm probably helps more than just charging
all the time, is this a better solution than removing the battery entirely?
Removing the battery isn't necessarily easy though, as it's unclear if most
phone would work without a battery present (maybe some kind of shim that bridges
the battery pins would work?), and disassembling the phone to get to the battery
isn't easy in most phones.

- How can consumers reuse their own devices?

Even if there was a free way to send your old phones/laptops to datacenters,
there are many barriers to adoption. First, a convenient distribution network.
Shipping phones/laptops requires some amount of care/padding, and most people
are unlikely to take the trouble of doing it. Second, data privacy concerns.
People maybe reluctant to send devices that at one point may have stored
sensitive data to untrusted third parties. This probably isn't a huge deal,
since many people regularly resell their devices after using them, but the
additional steps of having to wipe your device before shipping it is definitely
a non-trivial hurdle. The ideal scenario would be that consumers are able to
repurpose discarded devices on their own, but most people don't have a clear
usecase of additional computing resources. While there are some possibilities
like self-hosting websites, everyone self-hosting their own websites is probably
more carbon emissions than using hosting services that can better achieve
economies of scale and amortize emissions.

- Heterogeneous computing

The heterogeneous nature of discarded compute devices is particularly interesting
to me. While implementing this approach large scale would likely be able to
avoid the issue by only using the most popular devices, on a smaller scale it is
beneficial to be able to use any device. While there's prior work on building
hypervisors to abstract over heterogeneous/disaggregated resources, I don't
think I've seen any that build on top of consumer computing devices. That would
be very cool to see.

Overall, I'm glad this paper exists and seeing real numbers on what the
potential benefits of reusing devices in this way could be is encouraging.
However, it doesn't address logistics around aggregating devices, or around how
this approach could scale as new devices are added to a cluster (specifically,
in terms of the cost of setting up new devices). In my opinion, the fundamental
issue with modern e-waste is that consumers are incentivized to throw away
devices in favor of buying new, higher-margin devices compared to buying parts
to repair or upgrade devices. It follows that, right to repair legislation,
regulations around planned obsolescence, and less wasteful software (do you
really need multiple megabytes of JS to render a static page?!) are more likely
to have more meaningful impacts on carbon emissions.
