---
layout: post
title: Paper Review 04 - RT-kNNs Unbound
permalink: /posts/2024/02/05-thoughts-on-rtknns/
---

My thoughts on [`RT-kNNS` Unbound: Using RT Cores to Accelerate
Unrestricted Neighbor Search](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.18356.pdf)

---

Today's paper was published in `ICS '23`. It reduces the k-nearest neighbors
problem to a ray tracing problem. While I was vaguely familiar with ray tracing
as a concept, I had never previously looked into the APIs surrounding it, and
this paper was a pretty good introduction to how programs can be written to take
advantage of ray tracing (RT) cores.

## What is `k-NNS`?
`k-NNS`, or `k Nearest Neighbors Search`, is defined by the paper as follows:

> For a dataset \\(D\\) and query point \\(q \in D\\), find the set of \\(k\\) nearest points to \\(q\\)

This problem has a lot of real-world applications, such as in networking or in
biology.

## What is Ray Tracing?
Ray tracing is a technique for rendering 3D scenes with accurate lighting. It
works by simulating a ray of light being emitted from a particular source, and
traces the path it would follow, recording things like the colors and reflective
properties of materials it may interact with in order to determine the color of
a particular pixel in the final render. Some GPUs have dedicated hardware to
accelerate ray tracing. Incidentally, I've implemented a ray tracer in software
before as an elaborate [meme](https://github.com/aneeshdurg/bash-raytracer).

## Implementing `k-NNS` with RT acceleration

The paper presents an initial known implementation of RT accelerated `k-NNS`
that relies on the user specifying a maximum radius within which they would like
to search. One thing that I had to read carefully was that while the algorithm
seems to return all points with a distance within the specified radius, the
union operator seems to actually imply that that only the `k` closest points are
actually kept. However, this algorithm is insufficient because of the
requirement that the radius be supplied. So the authors build on this algorithm
by supplying an initial radius, and adding points that already found `k`
neighbors into the result set (along with their neighbors), and keeping points
that have not yet found `k` neighbors for additional iterations where the radius
is doubled between each iteration.

This poses an important question - what should the initial radius be? If the
radius picked is too large, then there will be many intersections and a lot of
compute to be done for each point. If the radius picked is too low, then the
process will need to be repeated for many iterations, incurring a lot of
overhead due to communication between the GPU and the host. To solve this, the
authors employ a random sampling approach, where a random subset of points are
chosen and `k-NNS` is run against this subset with `k=4` (want to choose a `k`
small enough for compute to be fast, and big enough to get meaningful data) and
the minimum distance from point to neighbor is chosen as the starting radius.

The paper has a lot of additional details around how this works and how the APIs
around ray tracing are used, the most important of which seems to be
constructing the BVH (bounding volume hierarchy), a  datastructure which the RT
cores rely on for efficient execution. The APIs around constructing this
structure leads to some performance left on the floor. I initially wanted to
write a much more details summary post with those details, but I don't think I
could make a more approachable summary than the already well-written
explanations in the paper. I considered making some animations to better capture
the concept, but I'll save that for a future blog post.

## My Thoughts
- Expanding support to higher dimensions/optimizing for lower dimensions

From what I can tell, this paper interprets all data as 3D in order to use the
RT APIs. For 2D data, we can observe that all points lie in the same plane, and
we're actually just looking at determining if a point is in a
circle/intersections between lines and circles. I don't know if current RT
libraries optimize this case, but it seems to me like there might be
opportunities there. Being able to expand this idea to work for more than 3
dimensions would be very useful in the context of things like vector DBs and AI,
which typically produce feature vectors that are much larger.

- Customizing radius expansion based on properties of the dataset

If we know that the dataset is very sparse or very dense, we might be able to
use a more optimal strategy for resizing the spheres instead of just doubling
the radius on every iteration. Very sparse datasets might benefit from faster
growth (more likely to find neighbors, fewer iterations overall), and very dense
datasets might benefit from smaller increment (less intersections, less compute
compared to larger radii).

- Similarity to circle packing

A couple years ago, I was working on GPU accelerated circle packing in order tio
achieve a [visual effect]({{ '/posts/2022-06-29-circle-packing/' | relative_url
}}). I wrote a bit about the algorithm I came up with [here]({{
'/posts/2022-06-23-circle-packing/' | relative_url }}). There's definitely some
conceptual similarities here which I found interesting.

- Are there APIs that expose ray tracing to WebGPU?

Not exactly related to the contributions of this paper, but something worth
looking into IMO. Web browsers are the way most people interact with technology
these days, and being able to take advantage of things like ray tracing would
allow for distribution of more computational intensive programs without needing
to install additional software. I think this is especially useful considering
the applications of kNN in things like vector DBs/AI.
