---
layout: post
title: 2024 Q2 Retrospective
permalink: /posts/2024/07/q2-retrospective
---

As Q2 of 2024 draws to a close, it's a good time to look back and reflect. Have
I continued the progress I started in Q1? What can I do better?

---

Another quarter done. It's been hectic, and I don't feel quite as jubilant as
last quarter, but it's good to reflect and acknowledge all the things that I did
do.

I'll be structuring this post to be in a sort of "reverse-order". The sections
closer to the top will be things I tend to write about less on this blog. If
you like my usual content, scroll all the way to the end.

## Personal

### Relationships

Maintaining an active social life can be exhausting! There's definitely been
moments in these last few months where I've felt that I'm stretched too thin,
with various commitments occupying all of my evenings in some weeks. Despite
that, there's still friends that I've only seen once or twice in the last few
months, and I'd like to work on improving those friendships. One new development
in this area is a weekly coworking session with some friends/ex-coworkers from
my last job. This has added a social aspect to my working life that I had missed
since I started a fully remote role. I've also noticed that the more stressed I
am, the more strained my personal relationships become, which is something I'd
like to work on.

### Fitness

This has not been an amazing quarter for fitness. I have not been as regular
as I would like, but I suppose it also has not been a major focus lately. As of
today, this year I have biked 708 miles and ran 113 miles. While I've more than
doubled the biking since last quarter, in these last 3 months I've ran a total
of 29 miles. Not insignificant, but it shows how the frequency has changed since
the start of the year. I'd like to return to a more consistent schedule of
exercise, but it's still not a major goal or focus for the year. Even though
the frequency has dropped off, I've still been getting stronger and faster and
I've set some PRs I'm pretty proud of recently.

I would still like to run a full marathon this year (or at least train for it so
I can run the Austin marathon next February), but it think I'll likely resume a
more serious approach to training only after the summer.

### Reading

My goal is to read 12 books this year. I'm currently at 6. Right on schedule!
I've only read fiction this quarter, but I think that's a reflection of me
needing some outlet for relaxation. I'm hoping to find some fun non-fiction
books next - maybe something historical?

My favorite book this quarter was [Assassin's Apprentice by Robin Hobb](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/77197.Assassin_s_Apprentice).

### Cooking

I've kept up with cooking reasonably well. There's some weeks where we get
takeout almost every day, but there's also weeks where we only order out once or
twice. I've managed to convince my partner to unban me from making pasta (long
story), and I've tried a couple new recipes, and perfected some old ones.

## Computing

It's been a busy 3 months. I've learned a lot and done a lot. I think I have a
good momentum going, now it's up to me to figure out how to keep this
sustainable.

### Work

Last quarter I was regularly working from coffeeshops and public spaces. This
quarter it hasn't been as regular, but I at least work from a coffeeshop once a
week, and I'll still occasionally go to one on my own if I notice myself
struggling to focus at home. This has in part been because my partner has the
summer off, and so our home office isn't as quiet anymore. Additionally, she has
finished setting up her half of the office, so the ambiance of this room is
nicer overall.

I've also gotten the chance to work on some interesting projects this quarter,
which has kept me more engaged and focused. Writing and debugging distributed
algorithms is always a fun time.

### Not Work

#### Open source contributions

Two PRs that I opened in the past were finally merged. One, I opened earlier
this year, the other almost two years ago. I had no real control over this
process, but I did start periodically trying to keep the issue for the two year
old PR alive this year, and maybe the maintainer noticed that it existed again?
I felt a little bad about pestering them, but I also wanted to know if there was
any actions they expected of me to get it merge-able. I think it just came down
to the maintainer working through their backlog until they got to it though.

#### Building a PC

Some of my side projects required more compute resources than I had on my
laptops, so I finally built a PC! It was fun to pick out the parts I wanted,
assemble them, and also setup SSH access so that I can log in to my home machine
even when I'm at a coffeeshop or the library. It was pretty expensive, but I
think it was a good purchase. I've definitely been using it daily. I did have
some initial hiccups - any time I ran anything that used all cores for more than
a few seconds, the process would randomly segfault. It was a really interesting
process to discovering the conditions under which things would crash, and I
eventually arrived at a workload that would consistently trigger the issue. I
suspected cooling problems at first, but it seems like the issue was resolved
after I updated the motherboard firmware. It was difficult to debug, but I
think a younger me would have given up, or fallen into a deep despair if faced
with the same issue. I felt like the fact that I was able to calmly and use my
skills of science and engineer to diagnose the issue and find the key things to
search for to find possible solutions was only possible thanks to the ways I've
grown over the last few years.

#### Decommissioning the best laptop I've ever used

In August 2016 I begrudgingly bought a laptop. I had a relatively limited
budget, and I ended up picking up a ThinkPad Yoga 14, because it seemed like the
best I could afford out of whatever the bestbuy in Urbana, IL had in stock. Over
the next three years I fell deeply in love with that machine. I loved the choice
of materials, with the aluminum top and the plastic body. I loved the selection
of ports (especially the full sized HDMI). But more than anything else, I came
to love the trackpoint. I didn't think I would enjoy using it, but it became
second nature to me. When the pandemic began, the first thing I did was to
install the company VPN on my thinkpad so that I could use that instead of the
macbook they gave me (which was so stupid, because our product couldn't build on
macos anyway - they also had a desktop provisioned for my exclusive use on my
desk, and the mac was just a thin client for my real workstation...). However, I
was not kind to the device, and a cracked screen and years of neglect eventually
had it collecting dust in a corner of my closet. I finally got around to
disassembling it, and kept the harddrive, keyboard, and trackpad, and dropped
the rest off at a e-waste recycling center. It was a bittersweet moment to let
go of the laptop that powered most of my education. It was on that keyboard that
I compiled my first `C` program, wrote my first kernel module, learned how to
use docker, learned how to use `LaTeX`, ran `sudo rm -rf / --no-preserve-root`
twice in the same day, set up `i3` for the first time, and made many projects
that I'm still proud of today. Additionally, when I first got the laptop I
started a naming convention that persists to this day - all my devices have
hostnames related to objects in space (mostly galaxies). Rest in peace
Andromeda.

#### Reconnecting with academia

I've kept up with reading papers, though not at the same pace that I had last
quarter. I've written about some of the more interesting ones on this blog. I've
also been working on a project to help investigate properties of distributed
graph databases called [toposim](https://github.com/aneeshdurg/toposim). This is
currently in use at the University of Washington, and it's encouraging to know
that my work benefits real users. There's more I'd like to write about this, but
that will have to be a later post. I've also found that my GRE scores have
expired, so I'm preparing to take it again to have them around just in case.

#### This blog!

I've made 9 blog posts this quarter, and 23 blog posts this year. The post
frequency has dropped off, but I'm glad that I haven't gone a month without
posting yet. My favorite post was the one about pyspark - I like writing about
weird things that rational programmers shouldn't do.

## Q3???

In Q2 I think I felt myself moving slower than Q1. The excitement and novelty of
being on a journey of discipline and self-improvement wore off, and reality that
being consistent in effort doesn't mean that everyday will feel as easy set in.
That being said, I think I've gotten so much better at motivating myself and
sticking to a plan. I'm happy that I haven't given up, I think I've made real
accomplishments in Q2, but I think in Q3 I'm going to need to define a better
path towards consistency. I need to set smaller goals and iterate towards them.
I'm trying not to be too harsh on myself, and I'm trying to be very open to the
idea that I'm still learning and growing. I've finally made the realization that
kindness to myself doesn't mean letting myself be lazy, it means that I can
acknowledge when I'm tired or unfocused, and press on. By the end of Q3, I'd
like to look back and say that I'm truly satisfied with the progress made, and
I'd like to feel like the strategies I've found are ones that will continue to
work in Q4.
