---
layout: post
title: Paper Review 10 - Cntr Lightweight OS Containers
permalink: /posts/2024/05/29-thoughts-on-cntr/
---

My thoughts on [Cntr: Lightweight OS Containers](https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/atc18/atc18-thalheim.pdf)

---

Today's paper first appeared in USENIX ATC ’18. I came across this paper as I've
recently been working on a [tool](https://github.com/aneeshdurg/toposim) for
understanding the effects of network topology on distributed applications by
using virtual network interfaces and containers. As this effort has required a
lot of debugging in containerized environments, the promise of tools that make
working with containers faster and easier is alluring.


## Overview

The aim of the paper is to describe a new lightweight container framework that
allows combining multiple container images, or combining the host and the
container, by leveraging `FUSE`. They refer to the split of the two images as
the `slim` and `fat` image, where the `slim` image only contains the application
and necessary environment, and the `fat` image may contain tools for debugging.
The motivating usecase is having to use  `GDB` on an application running in a
container, and not wanting to install `GDB` in the container. While one could
just find the `PID` of the running process in the host, `GDB` would then be
unable to resolve debug symbols, or may not find the right system libraries.
Without spending significant effort configuring `GDB`, or creating a strange new
union'ed filesystem, there not a lot of ways to achieve this. `cntr` solves this
problem by creating a new nested namespace inside the container's namespace, but
with the tools and `PATH` from the host. However, due to the usage of `FUSE`
some IO applications may suffer some performance impacts when run in the `cntr`
environment, but that might not matter for most usecases. The implementation is
open source and available on [github](https://github.com/Mic92/cntr).

## Thoughts

- This seems somewhat fragile. The paper provided no insight as to how tools
  like `GDB` may resolve system libraries.
- Alternatives and related works exist that weren't mentioned. At the time of
  publication, `snap` was already introduced in ubuntu, and there was discussion
  of file deduplication in `snap`. While this is admittedly more or less the
  same as docker's `UnionFS`, not mentioning/comparing against `snap` seemed
  odd. Additionally, `docker` already had the `--volumes-from` options which
  allows composing volumes from multiple containers together. While this doesn't
  solve the problem of exposing host tools to the container, it does achieve a
  similar solution without requiring a new tool.
- At a glance, I feel like this tool may not compose well with modern
  environment management tools like `conda`, though at the time of publication,
  `conda` was not widely used (if it even existed at the time)

Fundamentally, I think containers don't compose super well. Containers seem to
occupy a model of the world where composition is impossible to achieve, and so
the only solution is to compose at a higher level/horizontally scale, and rely
on magic within the container to deduplicate files or share resources. Maybe the
answer really is something like `snap`/`flatpak` where every application brings
the environment it relies on with it, so that applications can easily be used
across container boundaries. All this being said, `cntr` does seem to actively
maintained/developed, and one of it's key selling points now seems to be that it
can interop with virtually any container frameworks as opposed to being docker
specific - that definitely makes it more interesting. Overall though, I think
most of us are better off just using "fatter" images and adding tools as we need
them. Storage space is cheap, and sharing a fat base layer is completely free.
