---
layout: post
title: 2024 Q1 Retrospective
permalink: /posts/2024/03/
---

As Q1 of 2024 draws to a close, it's a good time to look back and reflect. Have
I held up the resolutions I picked at the end of last year? Whats kind of
progress have I made? What are areas I'd like to improve in?

---

It's almost hard to believe that a quarter of the year has flown by, but it's
been an exciting start to the year. One of my resolutions for this year was to
be more intentional about my efforts, and I think doing this retrospective as an
exercise will be a good way to gauge how well I've been sticking to that.

I'll be structuring this post to be in a sort of "reverse-order". The sections
closer to the top will be things I tend to write about less on this blog. So if
you like my usual content, scroll all the way to the end.

## Personal

### Relationships

I've been making more longstanding commitments with friends such as recurring
game nights, which has been something I've always wanted to get better at
regularly scheduling. I wouldn't say I' 100% there, in that there's definitely
some weeks where I forget to reach out to folks. One area I've definitely been
consistently dropping the ball is reaching out to my friends who don't live in
the same city as me. I try to check in on them every couple weeks or so, but
sometimes I just get too caught up in my day-to-day and forget to. Of course,
sometimes these friends reach out to me first, but establishing a regular
routine of communication takes a lot of initial effort to set up which has
definitely been something I haven't prioritized enough.

### Fitness

I don't write about it much, but biking and running are some of my favorite
hobbies. If I'm not at my laptop, I'm probably out on the trails. Last year, I
leaned on those hobbies a bit too much - I used them as a form of escapism, and
often jeopardized other goals, or put off work that felt boring or uncomfortable
in exchange for a nice long bike ride. This year, I've decided that I don't want
to stop running or biking, but I'd like to set clear boundaries on what my
relationship with these sports looks like. I've done a much better job of either
turning down opportunities to run or ride when I have pending tasks, or
incorporating those things into other parts of my life (e.g. I bike frequently,
but as my primary form of transportation).

As of writing this, I have biked 309 miles and ran 94 miles. To put that into
some context, that's far enough to have gone from my home in Austin, Texas, to
Dallas, Texas and back.

<div markdown="0" style="display: flex; margin-left: 1em">
    <div style="width: 45%; float: left;">
        <img src="{{ '/static/images/2024-03-25-q1-recap/strava2.png' | relative_url }}"/>
        <p style="font-size-adjust: 0.4">Biking</p>
    </div>
    <div style="width: 4%; float: right;">
    </div>
    <div style="width: 45%; float: right;">
        <img src="{{ '/static/images/2024-03-25-q1-recap/strava1.png' | relative_url }}"/>
        <p style="font-size-adjust: 0.4">Running</p>
    </div>
</div>

My goal for this year is to run a full marathon (no pace target). Currently the
furthest I've run is 15 miles. While that record was set recently, I also set my
fastest time for a half marathon back in February (1:47:34). Overall, I'd say
it's been a very successful Q1!

### Reading

My goal is to read 12 books this year. I'm currently at 3. This sounds like it's
right on track, but the reality is that 2 of the three were read in one month.
I'm not behind schedule, but I do need to establish a better sense of routine in
this area. One thing that would help is having the books available - 2 of the 3
books I read were gifts, so they were already lying around - picking them up was
a low effort task.

My favorite book so far has got to be [Chip War](https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/Chip-War/Chris-Miller/9781982172008).

### Cooking

I've gotten so much better at cooking regularly! My partner and I have been
trading off who cooks, we have something resembling a schedule, and we've gotten
better at portioning food so that we have enough for both dinner and the
following lunch. I've been trying to get more adventurous with the recipes I
take on, and I've been trying to focus on exploring diverse and unique foods
instead of things I'm already familiar with.

<div style="width: 50%; margin-left: 25%" markdown="1">
![A warm pot of Dal Makhni]({{ '/static/images/2024-03-25-q1-recap/food.jpg' | relative_url }})
</div>

## Computing

It's been a relatively productive 3 months! I've worked on a pretty wide
spectrum of things, and contributed to some new repos for the first time!

![I have a love/hate relationship with github's stats]({{ '/static/images/2024-03-25-q1-recap/gh.png' | relative_url }})

I'll divide this section into two parts, one for my professional life, and the
other for things I've done on my own.

### Work

For a long time, work felt incredibly difficult and I was struggling to adapt to
the combination of a new team/project and being fully remote. I've started to
get the hang of this lately, and something that has really helped me has been
working from coffee shops and public spaces. Even if I don't talk to strangers
at these spaces that often, just being around other people for a majority of the
day feels nice - maybe I'm more extroverted than I realize.

I've also been "commuting" to and from "work" by bike again - having some daily
activity feels good, and a commute helps provide a sense of separation between
work and home. Maybe it's weird that I'm trying to emulate in-person work
remotely, but for now the remote life also has some huge advantages that I can't
easily overlook (proximity to the community I've built). I'm not opposed to
relocation, but it's not something I'd like to do without a clear motivation.

I've completed a few different projects, become way more familiar with
`Java/Kotlin` than I was last year, gotten a pretty good handle on a few
frameworks we use, namely `calcite` and `numba`.

### Not Work


#### Reconnecting with academia

One of my long term goals has been to go back to school for a PhD and enter the
world of research. I've had tastes of working on research problems through my
work experiences and I want more. To that end, I've been reading more papers,
and built up a habit of recording the information I'm taking in and trying to
identify gaps or areas for further exploration. There's a lot of stuff I want to
write about this process, but I'll save that for it's own post.

This blog definitely has been a big part of this effort - I've been using it to
track interesting papers I read. The papers I write about aren't
representative of everything I've been reading. For example, I've also been
reading [Database Internals by Alex Petrov](https://www.databass.dev/), and I
plan on eventually making a repo that exhaustively tracks all the papers I read
so I can easily reference them, and maybe even backup notes that I take.

#### Side Projects

As part of being more intentional, I've tried to limit the number and scope of
side projects I take on. Since the new year, I've done a bit of maintenance work
on a lot of old projects to make sure that it's usable if someone other than me
ever tries these things out. I've also worked on a few new things which have
their own posts already.

#### This blog!

I've made 14 blog posts this year. Compared to only 4 last year and 6 the year
before, this is huge! While I numerically had more posts in 2021, it was far
less consistent. I even wrote a little script to visualize this blog's history:

![post frequency]({{ '/static/images/2024-03-25-q1-recap/freq.png' | relative_url }})

I'm not sure if I'll keep this momentum going all year, but I'm starting to get
more comfortable with "lower-effort" posts than I used to be. I'd like to also
start making more posts that just record interesting things I learned or tried.

I also finally added a comments system for this blog! I've yet to receive any
comments, but I also don't really publicize this blog. It's mostly here for me
to record my thoughts, so I don't really know to what I extent I _want_ to
publicize this blog. I may try to post about some of my writing on cohost or
something to try to get more readers/connect with other netizens.

## What's on the table for Q2?

For Q2 I don't have many specific goals other than to keep doing what I'm doing.
I've started to see some positive results, which means that this is at least the
right direction. I'm definitely learning a lot about discipline in general,
which feels positive. I'm excited for all the opportunities and possibilities
that Q2 brings with it, and I hope to rise to the occasion and continue to grow!
