---
layout: post
title: Paper Review 11 - Object Graph Programming
permalink: /posts/2024/05/29-thoughts-on-ogo/
---

My thoughts on [Object Graph Programming](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3597503.3623319)

---

Today's paper first appeared in ICSE ’24.


## Overview

This paper introduces `OGO` a tool for inspecting and modifying the object graph
of a Java program using `openCypher` by treating the program state as a graph
database. Examples of usecases include verifying program state during tests, or
finding objects that satisfy complex criteria. The paper considers two
implementations - one that uses `Neo4J` as the underlying database, and one that
is implemented by the authors and can operate over their in-memory graph
representation. In the `Neo4J` version, they incur the additional overhead of
needing to serialize their graph to `CSV` and then importing the graph into
`Neo4J`. The motivation behind having two implementations stems from their
in-house implementation not being as feature-complete or mature as `Neo4J` which
has been in active development for over a decade. 

To speed up synthesis of the graph, the paper outlines 3 optimizations which all
aim to reduce the size of the graph in some way by limiting what nodes/edges are
considered. The most expensive step overall seems to be creating the edges of
the graph.

## Thoughts

- I'm not sure how useful this is as a tool in general, but for testing,
  debugging, and tracing I can see how this could be a very powerful paradigm.
  The examples presented in the paper are not very compelling since the query
  representation obscures the intent of the code more than the normal version.
  It also doesn't seem easier to write unless you were in the small subset of
  people that know cypher _very_ well and don't know Java at all. An example
  that showed something more compelling, like finding an instance of an object
  satsifying some property (e.g. find all nodes of a tree with only a single
  child, or find all elements in a UI framework that have some type of child
  node, etc) would have shown cases where writing Cypher might be easier than
  writing Java, or writing code against APIs that aren't easily "queryable".

- Explicitly creating the graph seems slow and not generally useful -
  materializing the entire program as a graph is only needed if one runs queries
  that frequently iterate over the entire graphs. However, in the examples shown
  in the paper (and most non-pathological usecases I can think of) start from
  some known set of nodes (or in most cases, a single node) and explore the
  neighborhood of the initial set. Lazily materializing the graph would likely
  avoid some overhead, and eliminate the need for some optimizations in
  constructing the graph (reducing complexity). I've previously worked on
  [building a library](https://github.com/aneeshdurg/spycy) that aims to present
  `openCypher` as a frontend which can connect to an implementation of a graph
  interface. A clever implementation of the interface could directly connect to
  the program's in-memory state and explore the graph/materialize nodes and
  edges on-demand.

Overall, it's a cool idea, but I think I would have liked to see more examples
that motivated the need for a graph database in the program. I've previously
used custom annotations on `C/C++` functions to build a graph database that
could be used to statically enforce rules that prevent deadlock or other
semantic violations of an API ([see here](https://github.com/aneeshdurg/rainbow)) -
maybe something similar/better could be achieved without the need for custom
annotation by integrating graph databases more closely with the runtime.
