---
layout: post
title: One Decade of Programming Later...
---

It's been a decade since I started really thinking of myself as a _programmer_.
Here's some thoughts and reflections about my journey.

---

It's been significantly longer than a decade since I first learned how to
program, but it's only been a decade since I started viewing myself as a
programmer. In august of 2015, I moved to Urbana, IL to began my undergraduate
studies in computer science at UIUC. I vividly remember the overwhelming anxiety
I felt at the time - there was so much to learn, and so many people already
seemed so comfortable with their programming ability. At my lowest moments, I
felt like I'd never catch up. A decade later, I feel pretty comfortable in my
abilities. I'm not absolved of impostor syndrome, but missing semi-colons don't
send me into a depressive spiral anymore.

Writing this post was pretty challenging. Initially I wanted to document the
most fun things I've worked on in my journey as a computer scientist so far, but
it read way too self-indulgent for me to feel comfortable posting it. In the
end, I decided that no matter what I wrote, I wouldn't be satisfied with it, so
I decided to just post something. In a way, I think learning that perfect is the
enemy of trying something at all and learning from the experience is a pretty
big personal lesson that programming has taught me.

## What has changed in the world?

A lot of things have changed over the last decade, but it's hard to say how much
of my perception here is truly changes within the industry versus
academia/undergraduate instruction lagging behind reality. Here's some scattered
thoughts on the matter:

+ It seems like cloud adoption is at least an enduring trend - I'm glad I was
  able to gain some skills around it at school/early in my career.
+ Containers have gotten a lot better (at least in linux), but they haven't
  truly solved the problems of sharing development environments in a
  satisfactory way.
+ MicroVMs are a pretty cool thing that's been gaining more adoption. I've got
  my eye on it as something that I expect to see be a basis for bigger things.
+ Protocols take a long time to gain support and widespread adoption. I'm still
  sure QUIC is just around the corner. Even extensions to protocols that seem
  like obvious quality of life upgrades (e.g. MPTCP) don't always succeed.
+ "Learn the fundamentals" is enduring advice - people with a very strong grasp
  of the fundamentals are able to transfer skills and adapt as the times
  change.
+ AI hype will probably always be around. I try not to buy into the hype too
  much, but being overly cynical will also bias your thinking in
  non-constructive ways, so I try not to do that either.


## What do I want to do over the next decade?

I think it's poetic that I'm starting my second decade as a programmer on the
precipice of entering grad school. I hope to contribute to the growing frontier
of computing, but I also hope that when I look back in 2035, that I can proudly
say that I helped contribute to humanity, and not feel like I helped accelerate
it's destruction. Technology is currently playing a pivotal role in the many
threats to society and the planet.
